A prion is a misfolded protein that induces misfolding in normal variants of the same protein, leading to cellular death.
Prions are responsible for prion diseases, known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, which are fatal and transmissible neurodegenerative diseases affecting both humans and animals.
These proteins can misfold sporadically, due to genetic mutations, or by exposure to an already misfolded protein, leading to an abnormal three-dimensional structure that can propagate misfolding in other proteins.
The term prion comes from "proteinaceous infectious particle".
Unlike other infectious agents such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi, prions do not contain nucleic acids.
Prions are mainly twisted isoforms of the major prion protein, a naturally occurring protein with an uncertain function.
They are the hypothesized cause of various transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, including scrapie in sheep, chronic wasting disease in deer, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle.
All known prion diseases in mammals affect the structure of the brain or other neural tissues.
These diseases are progressive, have no known effective treatment, and are invariably fatal.
Most prion diseases were thought to be caused by prion protein until recently when a prion form of alpha-synuclein was linked to multiple system atrophy.
Misfolded proteins are also linked to other neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which are sometimes referred to as prion-like diseases.
Prions are a type of intrinsically disordered protein that continuously changes conformation unless bound to a specific partner, such as another protein.
Once a prion binds to another in the same conformation, it stabilizes and can form a fibril, leading to abnormal protein aggregates called amyloids.
These amyloids accumulate in infected tissue, causing damage and cell death.
The structural stability of prions makes them resistant to denaturation by chemical or physical agents, complicating disposal and containment, and raising concerns about iatrogenic spread through medical instruments.
Prions consist of a misfolded form of major prion protein, a protein that is a natural part of the bodies of humans and other animals.
The prion protein found in infectious prions has a different structure and is resistant to proteases, the enzymes in the body that can normally break down proteins.
The normal form of the protein is called cellular prion protein, while the infectious form is called scrapie prion protein, the prototypic prion disease, occurring in sheep.
prion protein can also be induced to fold into other more-or-less well-defined isoforms in vitro; although their relationships to the forms that are pathogenic in vivo is often unclear, high-resolution structural analyses have begun to reveal structural features that correlate with prion infectivity.
Cellular prion protein is a normal protein found on the membranes of cells, "including several blood components of which platelets constitute the largest reservoir in humans."
It has more than two-hundred amino acids, one disulfide bond, and a mainly alpha-helical structure.
Several topological forms exist; one cell surface form anchored via glycolipid and two transmembrane forms.
The normal protein is not sedimentable; meaning that it cannot be separated by centrifuging techniques.
It has a complex function, which continues to be investigated.
Cellular prion protein binds copper ions with high affinity.
This property is supposed to play a role in cellular prion protein’s anti-oxidative properties via reversible oxidation of the N-terminal’s methionine residues into sulfoxide.
Moreover, studies have suggested that, in vivo, due to cellular prion protein’s low selectivity to metallic substrates, the protein’s anti oxidative function is impaired when in contact with metals other than copper.
Cellular prion protein is readily digested by proteinase K and can be liberated from the cell surface by the enzyme phosphoinositide phospholipase C, which cleaves the glycophosphatidylinositol glycolipid anchor.
Prion protein plays an important role in cell-cell adhesion and intracellular signaling in vivo, and may therefore be involved in cell-cell communication in the brain.
The infectious isoform of prion protein, known as scrapie prion protein, or simply the prion, is able to convert normal cellular prion protein proteins into the infectious isoform by changing their conformation, or shape; this, in turn, alters the way the proteins interconnect.
scrapie prion protein always causes prion disease.
scrapie prion protein has a higher proportion of β-sheet structure in place of the normal α-helix structure.
Several highly infectious, brain-derived scrapie prion protein structures have been discovered by cryo-electron microscopy.
Another brain-derived fibril structure isolated from humans with Gerstmann-Straussler-Schienker syndrome has also been determined.
All of the structures described in high resolution so far are amyloid fibers in which individual prion protein molecules are stacked via intermolecular beta sheets.
However, two-dimensional crystalline arrays have also been reported at lower resolution in ex vivo preparations of prions.
In the prion amyloids, the glycolipid anchors and asparagine-linked glycans, when present, project outward from the lateral surfaces of the fiber cores.
Often scrapie prion protein is bound to cellular membranes, presumably via its array of glycolipid anchors, however, sometimes the fibers are dissociated from membranes and accumulate outside of cells in the form of plaques.
The end of each fiber acts as a template onto which free protein molecules may attach, allowing the fiber to grow.
This growth process requires complete refolding of cellular prion protein.
Different prion strains have distinct templates, or conformations, even when composed of prion protein molecules of the same amino acid sequence, as occurs in a particular host genotype.
Under most circumstances, only prion protein molecules with an identical amino acid sequence to the infectious prion protein are incorporated into the growing fiber.
However, cross-species transmission also happens rarely.
The first hypothesis that tried to explain how prions replicate in a protein-only manner was the heterodimer model.
This model assumed that a single scrapie prion protein molecule binds to a single cellular prion protein molecule and catalyzes its conversion into scrapie prion protein.
The two scrapie prion protein molecules then come apart and can go on to convert more cellular prion protein.
However, a model of prion replication must explain both how prions propagate, and why their spontaneous appearance is so rare.
Manfred Eigen showed that the heterodimer model requires scrapie prion protein to be an extraordinarily effective catalyst, increasing the rate of the conversion reaction by a factor of around a thousand.
This problem does not arise if scrapie prion protein exists only in aggregated forms such as amyloid, where cooperativity may act as a barrier to spontaneous conversion.
What is more, despite considerable effort, infectious monomeric scrapie prion protein has never been isolated.
An alternative model assumes that scrapie prion protein exists only as fibrils, and that fibril ends bind cellular prion protein and convert it into scrapie prion protein.
If this were all, then the quantity of prions would increase linearly, forming ever longer fibrils.
But exponential growth of both scrapie prion protein and the quantity of infectious particles is observed during prion disease.
This can be explained by taking into account fibril breakage.
A mathematical solution for the exponential growth rate resulting from the combination of fibril growth and fibril breakage has been found.
The exponential growth rate depends largely on the square root of the cellular prion protein concentration.
The incubation period is determined by the exponential growth rate, and in vivo data on prion diseases in transgenic mice match this prediction.
The same square root dependence is also seen in vitro in experiments with a variety of different amyloid proteins.
The mechanism of prion replication has implications for designing drugs.
Since the incubation period of prion diseases is so long, an effective drug does not need to eliminate all prions, but simply needs to slow down the rate of exponential growth.
Models predict that the most effective way to achieve this, using a drug with the lowest possible dose, is to find a drug that binds to fibril ends and blocks them from growing any further.
Researchers at Dartmouth College discovered that endogenous host cofactor molecules such as the phospholipid molecule and polyanions are necessary to form scrapie prion protein molecules with high levels of specific infectivity in vitro, whereas protein-only scrapie prion protein molecules appear to lack significant levels of biological infectivity.
Prions cause neurodegenerative disease by aggregating extracellularly within the central nervous system to form plaques known as amyloids, which disrupt the normal tissue structure.
This disruption is characterized by "holes" in the tissue with resultant spongy architecture due to the vacuole formation in the neurons.
Other histological changes include astrogliosis and the absence of an inflammatory reaction.
While the incubation period for prion diseases is relatively long, once symptoms appear the disease progresses rapidly, leading to brain damage and death.
Neurodegenerative symptoms can include convulsions, dementia, ataxia, and behavioural or personality changes.
Many different mammalian species can be affected by prion diseases, as the prion protein is very similar in all mammals.
Due to small differences in prion protein between different species it is unusual for a prion disease to transmit from one species to another.
The human prion disease variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, however, is thought to be caused by a prion that typically infects cattle, causing bovine spongiform encephalopathy and is transmitted through infected meat.
All known prion diseases are untreatable and fatal.
Until recently, all known mammalian prion diseases were considered to be caused by the prion protein.
Afterwards, this remains true for diseases in the category of "transmissible spongiform encephalopathy", which is transmissible and causes a specific sponge-like appearance of infected brain tissue.
The endogenous, properly folded form of the prion protein is denoted cellular prion protein  whereas the disease-linked, misfolded form is denoted scrapie prion protein, after one of the diseases first linked to prions and neurodegeneration.
The precise structure of the prion is not known, though they can be formed spontaneously by combining cellular prion protein, homopolymeric polyadenylic acid, and lipids in a protein misfolding cyclic amplification reaction even in the absence of pre-existing infectious prions.
This result is further evidence that prion replication does not require genetic information.
It has been recognized that prion diseases can arise in three different ways: acquired, familial, or sporadic.
It is often assumed that the diseased form directly interacts with the normal form to make it rearrange its structure.
One idea, the "Protein X" hypothesis, is that an as-yet unidentified cellular protein enables the conversion of cellular prion protein to scrapie prion protein by bringing a molecule of each of the two together into a complex.
The primary method of infection in animals is through ingestion.
It is thought that prions may be deposited in the environment through the remains of dead animals and via urine, saliva, and other body fluids.
They may then linger in the soil by binding to clay and other minerals.
A University of California research team has provided evidence for the theory that infection can occur from prions in manure.
And, since manure is present in many areas surrounding water reservoirs, as well as used on many crop fields, it raises the possibility of widespread transmission.
Although it was initially reported more than a decade ago that researchers had discovered prions spreading through airborne transmission on aerosol particles in an animal testing experiment focusing on scrapie infection in laboratory mice, this report was retracted in last year.
Preliminary evidence supporting the notion that prions can be transmitted through use of urine-derived human menopausal gonadotropin, administered for the treatment of infertility, was published the same year.
