As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning out of restless dreams, he found himself in bed, transformed into a gargantuan pest.
He lay on his hard, armored back and saw, as he raised his head a little, his domed, brown belly, divided into arched segments; he could hardly keep the bed sheets from sliding from his stomach's height completely to the floor.
His numerous legs, lamentably thin in comparison to his new girth, flickered helplessly before his eyes.
“What has happened to me?” he thought.
It was no dream.
His room, a proper room for a human being (albeit a little too small), lay still between the four familiar walls.
Above the table, upon which a collection of sample cloth goods was spread out in stacks—Samsa was a traveling salesman—hung the picture which he had cut out of an illustrated magazine a little while ago and set in a pretty gilt frame.
It depicted a woman who, with a fur hat and a fur boa, sat erect, lifting up in the direction of the viewer a solid fur muff into which her entire forearm had disappeared.
Gregor's glance then turned to the window, and the dreary weather—one heard raindrops falling upon the window ledge—made him quite melancholy.
“How would it be if I kept sleeping for a little while longer and forgot all this foolishness,” he thought; but this was entirely impractical, for he was accustomed to sleeping on his right side, and in his present circumstances, he couldn't bring himself into this position.
No matter how hard he threw himself onto his right side, he always rolled again into a prone position.
He tried it a full hundred times, closing his eyes because he had to avoid seeing the wriggling legs, and gave up trying when he began to feel a slight, dull pain in his side that he had hitherto not felt.
“Oh God,” he thought, “what a strenuous occupation I've chosen!
Always on the road, day out, day in.
The rigors of the job are much greater than if I were working locally, and, furthermore, the nuisances of traveling are always imposed upon me—the worries about train connections, bad meals at irregular intervals, fleeting human contact that is ever-changing, never lasting, and never expected to be genuine.
To the devil with it all!” He felt a slight itching on the top of his abdomen.
He slowly pushed himself on his back closer to the bedpost so that he could lift his head more easily, found the itchy area, which was entirely covered with small white spots—he did not know what to make of them—and wanted to feel the place with a leg.
But he retracted it immediately, for the contact felt like a cold shower all over him.
He slid back again into his earlier position.
“This getting up early,” he thought, “makes one completely idiotic.
A man must have his sleep.
Other travelers live like harem women.
For instance, when I come back to the inn during the course of the morning to write up the necessary orders, these gentlemen are just sitting down to breakfast.
If I were to try that with my boss, I'd be thrown out on the spot.
“Who knows, though—that might not be such a bad thing.
If I didn't hold back for my parents' sake, I'd have quit ages ago.
I would go to the boss and state my opinion out loud from the bottom of my heart.
He would've fallen right off his desk!
He's a strange sort, sitting up on that desk and speaking down to the employee from on high like that.
Moreover, the boss has trouble hearing, and one has to step up close to him.
At any rate, hope is not completely gone: once I've collected the money to pay off my parents' debt to him—that should take another five or six years—I'll do it for sure.
I'll cut all ties and move on.
In any case, right now I have to get up; my train leaves at five.”

He saw the alarm clock over there, ticking on the chest of drawers.
“Good God!” he thought.
It was half past six, and the hands were going quietly on.
It was past the half hour, almost quarter to seven.
Shouldn't the alarm have sounded?
One could see from the bed that it had been properly set for four o'clock.
Certainly it had rung.
And was it even possible for one to sleep quietly through the noise that made even the furniture shake?
Now, he certainly hadn't had a peaceful sleep, but apparently it was deep nonetheless.
But what should he do now?
The next train left at seven o'clock.
To catch that one, he would have to make a mad dash; his assortment of wares wasn't packed up yet, and he really didn't feel particularly fresh and active.
And even if he caught the train, there was no way to avoid those storm clouds brewing over the boss' head, because the firm's errand boy would've waited for the five o'clock train and reported the news of his absence long ago.
He was the boss's minion, without backbone or intelligence.
Well then, what if he called in sick?
But that would be extremely embarrassing and suspicious, because during his five years' service Gregor hadn't been sick even once.
The boss would certainly come with the doctor from the health insurance company and would reproach his parents for their lazy son, cutting short all objections with the comments from the insurance doctor, who thought everyone was completely healthy but work-shy.
And besides, would the doctor in this case be totally wrong?
Apart from an excessive drowsiness after the long sleep, Gregor, in fact, felt quite well and even had an especially strong appetite.
As he was thinking all this over in the greatest haste, without being able to make the decision to get out of bed (the clock struck quarter to seven), there was a cautious knock on the door near the head of the bed.
“Gregor,” a voice called—it was mother.
“It's quarter to seven.
Don't you want to be on your way?” The soft voice!
Gregor was startled when he heard his voice answering.
It was clearly and unmistakably his earlier voice, but in it was intermingled, as if from below, an irrepressibly painful squeaking, which left the words positively distinct only in the first moment and distorted them in the next moment, so that one didn't know if one had heard correctly.
Gregor wanted to answer in detail and explain everything, but in these circumstances he confined himself to saying, “Yes, yes, thank you mother.
I'm getting up right away.” Because of the wooden door, the change in Gregor's voice was not really noticeable outside, so his mother calmed down with this explanation and shuffled off.
However, as a result of the short conversation, the other family members became aware that Gregor was unexpectedly still at home, and already his father was knocking on one side door, weakly but with his fist.
“Gregor, Gregor,” he called out.
“What's going on?” And, after a short while, he urged him on again in a deeper voice: “Gregor!
Gregor!” At the other side door, however, his sister knocked lightly.
“Gregor?
Are you not well?
Do you need anything?” Gregor directed answers at both sides: “I'm almost done.” He made an effort with the most careful articulation and by inserting long pauses between the individual words to remove everything remarkable from his voice.
Father turned back to his breakfast.
However, the sister whispered, “Gregor, open the door—I beg you.” Gregor had no intention of opening the door, but congratulated himself on his precaution, acquired from traveling, of locking all doors during the night, even at home.
First, he wanted to get out of bed quietly and without disturbance, get dressed, above all to have breakfast, and only then consider further action, for—he noticed this clearly—by thinking things over in bed he would not reach any sensible conclusions.
He already remembered that he had often felt a light pain in bed, perhaps the result of some awkward sleeping position, which later turned out to be purely imaginary when he stood up, and he was eager to see how his present fantasies would gradually fade away.
That the change in his voice was nothing other than the onset of a real chill, an occupational illness of commercial travelers—of that he had not the slightest doubt.
It was very easy to throw aside the blanket; he needed only to push himself up a little, and it fell by itself.
But to continue was difficult, particularly because he was so unusually wide.
He needed arms and hands to push himself upright.
In the place of these, however, he had only a lot of little legs, which were incessant in their various motions and which, moreover, he was unable to control.
If he wanted to bend one of them, then it was the first to stretch itself out, and meanwhile, if he finally succeeded in doing what he wanted with this limb, all the others, as if left free, moved around in an excessively painful agitation.
“But I must not stay in bed uselessly,” said Gregor to himself.
At first he wanted to get out of bed with the lower part of his body, but this lower part—which, by the way, he had not yet looked at and which he also couldn't clearly imagine—proved itself too difficult to move.
The attempt went so slowly.
When, having become almost frantic, he finally hurled himself forward with all his force and without thinking, he chose his direction incorrectly, and he hit the lower bedpost hard.
The burning pain he felt taught him that the lower part of his body was, at the moment, perhaps the most sensitive.
Thus, he tried to get his upper body out of the bed first and turned his head carefully toward the edge of the bed.
He managed to do this easily, and in spite of its width and weight, his body mass at last slowly followed the turning of his head.
But as he finally raised his head outside the bed in the open air, he became anxious about moving forward any further in this manner, for if he allowed himself eventually to fall by this process, it would take a miracle to prevent his head from getting injured.
And, at all costs, he must not lose consciousness right now; he would prefer to remain in bed.
However, after a similar effort whereby he brought himself with a deep sigh back into his prone position and once again saw his little legs fighting one another with even more fury than before, if such a thing were possible, and didn't see any chance of bringing peace and order to this arbitrary movement, he told himself again that he couldn't possibly remain in bed and that it might be the most reasonable thing to sacrifice everything if there were even the slightest hope of freeing himself from bed in the process.
At the same moment, however, he didn't forget now and then to remember that the calm and calmest contemplation would be much better than desperate conclusions.
At such moments, he directed his gaze as precisely as he could toward the window, but unfortunately there was little confidence or encouragement to be had from a glance at the morning mist, which concealed even the other side of the narrow street.
“Already seven o'clock,” he told himself at the latest striking of the alarm clock, “already seven o'clock and still such a fog.” And, for a little while longer, he lay quietly, breathing weakly, as if waiting, perhaps, for his real and natural proportions to return out of the complete stillness.
But then he said to himself: “Prior to it striking quarter past seven, I must by all means abandon this bed completely.
Besides, by then, someone from the office will arrive to inquire about me, because the office will open before seven o'clock.” And he made an effort then to rock the entire length of his body out of the bed with a uniform motion.
If he let himself fall out of the bed in this way, his head, which in the course of the fall he intended to lift up sharply, would in all likelihood remain uninjured.
His back seemed to be hard; nothing would really happen to that as a result of the fall on the carpet.
His greatest reservation was a worry about the loud crash that the fall must cause and which presumably would cause fright, or at the very least concern, on the other side of the doors.
It had to be risked, though.
When Gregor was already sticking out halfway off the bed—the new method was more of a game than a strain since he needed only to rock consistently with a jerking motion—it struck him how easy all this would be if someone were to come to his aid.
Two strong people—he thought of his father and the maid—would have been entirely sufficient.
They would only have had to slide their arms under his dome-like back in order to pry him out of bed, to bend down with their load, and then merely to exercise patience and care so that he completely swung over onto the floor, where hopefully his little legs would acquire some sense.
Now, quite apart from the fact that the doors were locked, should he really call out for help?
In spite of all his distress, he was unable to suppress a smile at this idea.
Because he was rocking so strongly, he was already at the point where he could hardly maintain his balance, and very soon he would have to definitively choose, for in five minutes it would be quarter past seven—and there was a ring at the door of the apartment.
“That's someone from the office,” he told himself, and he was almost paralyzed because his small legs only danced around all the faster.
For one moment, everything remained still.
“They aren't opening it,” Gregor said to himself, biased in favor of this idea by some absurd hope.
But, naturally, the maid's firm steps went as they always did and opened the door.
Gregor needed to hear only the first word of the visitor's greeting to recognize immediately who it was—the firm's attorney himself.
Why was Gregor the only one condemned to work in a firm where, at the slightest lapse, someone immediately attracted the greatest suspicion?
Were all the employees then collectively, one and all, scoundrels; was there among them then not one truly devoted person who, failing to take advantage of the morning hours for work, would go mad because of pangs of conscience and would, therefore, not be fit to leave bed?
Was it truly insufficient to have an apprentice inquire—if such interrogation were even necessary; did the attorney need to come himself, and through his coming, did the entire innocent family need to be shown that the investigation of this suspicious affair could be entrusted only to the attorney's understanding?
And, more as a consequence of the excited state in which this idea put Gregor than as a result of an actual decision, he swung himself with all his might out of the bed.
There was a loud thud, but it was not really a crash.
The fall was absorbed somewhat by the carpet and, in addition, his back was more elastic than Gregor had thought, and for this reason the dull noise was not conspicuous at all.
But he had not held his head up with sufficient care and had hit it; because of the pain and irritation, he turned his head and rubbed it on the carpet.
“Something has fallen in there,” said the attorney in the next room on the left.
Gregor tried to imagine to himself whether anything similar to what was happening to him today could have also happened at some point to the attorney; at the very least, one had to concede the possibility of such a thing.
However, as if to give a rough answer to this question, the attorney now, allowing his polished shoes to creak, took a few determined steps in the next room.
From the neighboring room on the right the sister was whispering to inform Gregor: “Gregor, the attorney is here.” “I know,” said Gregor to himself; but he did not dare raise his voice loud enough so that his sister could hear.
“Gregor,” his father now said from the neighboring room on the left, “the head attorney has come and is asking why you did not leave on the early train.
We don't know what we should tell him.
Besides, he also wants to speak to you personally.
So please open the door.
He will certainly be good enough to forgive the mess in your room.”

In the middle of all this, the attorney called out in a friendly way, “Good morning, Mr. Samsa.” “He is not well,” said his mother to the attorney, while his father was still talking at the door.
“He is not well, sir, believe me, good attorney.
Otherwise, how would Gregor miss a train!
The boy has nothing in his head except business.
I'm almost angry that he never goes out at night; right now he's been in the city eight days, but he's been at home every evening.
He sits here with us at the table and quietly reads the newspaper or studies his travel schedules.
Doing fretsaw work is also quite a diversion for him.
For instance, he cut out a small frame over the course of two or three evenings; you'd be amazed how pretty it is—it's hanging right inside the room—you'll see it immediately, as soon as Gregor opens the door.
Anyway, I'm happy that you're here, good attorney; by ourselves, we wouldn't have brought Gregor to the point of opening the door; he's so stubborn, and he's certainly not well, although he denied that this morning.”

“I'm coming right away,” said Gregor slowly and deliberately; he didn't move, so as not to lose one word of the conversation.
“My dear lady, I cannot explain it to myself in any other way,” said the attorney.
“I hope it is nothing serious.
On the other hand, I must also say that we business people—for better or worse, however one looks at it—very often simply have to overcome a minor infirmity for business concerns.” “So can the good attorney come in to see you now?” asked the impatient father as he knocked once again on the door.
“No,” said Gregor.
In the adjacent room on the left, an embarrassing stillness set in; in the adjacent room on the right, the sister began to sob.
Why didn't the sister go to the others?
She'd probably just gotten up out of bed and hadn't even started to get dressed yet.
Then why was she crying?
Because he wasn't getting up and wasn't letting the attorney in, because he was in danger of losing his position, and because then his boss would badger his parents once again with the old demands?
At this point, those worries were completely unnecessary.
Gregor was still here and wasn't thinking at all about deserting his family.
At the moment, he was lying right there on the carpet, and no one who knew about his condition would've seriously requested that he let the attorney in.
But because of this minor rudeness, for which he would easily find a suitable excuse later, Gregor could not be immediately dismissed.
It seemed to Gregor that it might be far more reasonable to leave him in peace at the moment instead of disturbing him with crying and persuasion.
But it was that very uncertainty that distressed the others and excused their behavior.
“Mr.
Samsa,” called out the attorney with a raised voice, “what's the matter?
You are barricading yourself in your room, answering with a mere yes or no, making serious and unnecessary troubles for your parents, and neglecting (I mention this only incidentally) your commercial duties in a truly unheard-of manner.
I am speaking here in the name of your parents and your supervisors, and I am asking you earnestly for an immediate, clear explanation.
I am amazed; I am amazed.
I thought I knew you as a calm, reasonable person, and now you appear suddenly to want to start parading about with peculiar moods.
The supervisor mentioned to me earlier this very day a possible explanation for your neglect—it concerned the collection of cash entrusted to you a short while ago—but, in truth, I gave him my word of honor that this explanation could not be correct.
However, now I see here your unfathomable stubbornness, and I am completely losing any desire to stick out my neck for you at all.
And your position is certainly not the most secure one.
I originally had the intention of keeping all of this between the two of us, but since you are letting me waste my time here uselessly, I don't know why your parents shouldn't also learn about it.
Your performance has also been quite unsatisfactory of late; it's hardly the time of year for making exceptional sales, we acknowledge that, but there is no such thing at all as a time of year for making no sales, Mr. Samsa; such a thing will not be permitted.”

“But attorney, sir,” called Gregor, beside himself and, in his agitation, forgetting everything else, “I'm opening the door immediately, this very moment.
A slight indisposition, a dizzy spell, has prevented me from getting up.
I'm still lying in bed right now.
But I'm already quite refreshed again.
I'm climbing out of bed this instant.
Just a short moment of patience!
Things are not going as well as I thought.
But I'm still well.
How suddenly this can overcome a person!
Only yesterday evening everything was fine with me, my parents certainly know that; actually just yesterday evening, I had a slight premonition.
People must have seen that in me.
Indeed, why didn't I report that to the office!
But people always think that they'll get over sickness without having to stay at home.
My dear sir, attorney!
Spare my parents!
There is really no basis for the accusations which you are now leveling against me, and until now, nobody has mentioned a word of this to me.
Perhaps you have not read the latest orders which I shipped.
Moreover, now I'm setting out on my trip on the eight o'clock train; the few hours of rest have strengthened me.
Attorney, sir, don't tarry; I will be at the office in person right away; please have the kindness to say that and to give my regards to the supervisor!”

While Gregor was quickly blurting all this out, hardly aware of what he was saying, he had moved close to the chest of drawers without effort, probably as a result of the practice he had already had in bed, and now he was trying to stand up straight using it.
He actually wanted to open the door.
He really wanted to let himself be seen by and to speak with the attorney.
He was eager to see what the others, who were making such demands of him, would say once they caught a glimpse of him.
If they were startled, then Gregor had no more responsibility and could be calm.
But if they took in everything quietly, then he would have no reason to get excited and could, if he hurried, actually be at the train station around eight o'clock.
At first he slid down a few times on the smooth chest of drawers, but eventually, he gave himself a final swing and stood upright there; he paid no more heed to the pains in his lower body, no matter how they might still sting.
Now he let himself fall against the back of a nearby chair, on the edge of which he braced himself with his thin limbs.
By doing this, he gained control over himself and kept quiet, for he could now hear the attorney.
“Did you understand even a single word?” the attorney asked the parents.
“Is he making a fool of us?” “For God's sake,” cried the mother, already in tears.
“Perhaps he's very ill, and we're upsetting him.
Grete!
Grete!” she then cried out.
“Mother?” called the sister from the other side.
They were communicating through Gregor's room.
“You must go to the doctor immediately.
Gregor is sick.
Hurry to the doctor.
Have you heard Gregor speak yet?” “That was an animal's voice,” said the attorney with a voice that was remarkably quiet in comparison to the mother's screaming.
“Anna!
Anna!” yelled the father through the hall into the kitchen, clapping his hands.
“Fetch a locksmith right away!” The two young women ran immediately through the hall with swishing skirts—how had his sister dressed herself so quickly?—and tore open the front door.
No one heard the front door close at all; it was left wide open, as is customary in apartments where a huge tragedy has occurred.
Gregor, however, had become much calmer.
All right, people did not understand his words any more, although they seemed clear enough to him, clearer than before, perhaps because his ears had become accustomed to them.
But at least people now thought that things were not well with him and were prepared to help him.
The confidence and assurance with which the first arrangements had been carried out made him feel good.
He felt himself included once again in the circle of humanity and was expecting from them both, from the doctor and from the locksmith, without exactly differentiating between them, splendid and surprising results.
In order to get as clear a voice as possible for the decisive discussion to come, he coughed a little, and yet he took pains to ensure that this was muted, since it was possible that even this noise sounded like something different from a human cough, and he no longer trusted himself to discern whether it was or not.
Meanwhile, in the next room, it had become completely quiet.
Perhaps his parents were sitting with the attorney at the table whispering about him; perhaps they were all leaning against the door, eavesdropping.
Gregor pushed himself slowly towards the door with the help of the chair, let go of it there, threw himself against the door, held himself upright against it—the balls of his tiny legs had a little adhesive on them—and took a brief respite from his labors.
But then he took it upon himself to rotate the key in the lock with his mouth.
Unfortunately it seemed that he had no real teeth—with what then was he to grab hold of the key?
But for this, of course, his jaws were very strong; with their help, he really brought the key into motion, and didn't quite pay attention to the fact that he was undoubtedly causing some harm to himself, because a brown liquid came out of his mouth, flowed over the key, and dripped onto the floor.
“Just listen,” said the attorney in the adjacent room; “he's turning the key.” This really cheered Gregor up, but they all should have called out to him, including his father and mother; they should have shouted, “Come on, Gregor, get right near it; hold fast to that lock!” Imagining that all his efforts were being followed with suspense, he focused, with all the determination and strength he could summon, on the lock.
After each progression of the key's rotation, he danced about the lock; he held himself upright now only with his mouth, and he had to hang onto the key or, as necessary, to press it down once more with the whole weight of his body.
The clear noise of the bolt as it finally snapped back positively woke Gregor up.
Out of breath, he said to himself: “So I didn't need the locksmith,” and he set his head against the door handle to open the door completely.
The door had already been opened wide without him yet being completely visible, seeing that he had had to open it in this way.
He first had to turn himself slowly around the edge of the door, very carefully, of course, if he didn't want to fall clumsily on his back right at the entrance into the room.
He was still preoccupied with this difficult movement and had no time to pay attention to anything else when he heard the attorney shout out a loud “Oh!”—it sounded like the wind whistling—and now he saw him, the nearest one to the door, pressing his hand against his open mouth and retreating slowly, as if pushed back by an invisible, constant, inexorable force.
The mother—she stood here, in spite of the presence of the attorney, with her hair standing on end all over the place from the night—was looking at the father with her hands clasped.
She then took two steps towards Gregor and collapsed right in the middle of her skirts, which were spread out all around her; her face was sunk on her breast, completely concealed.
The father clenched his fist, showing a hostile expression, as if he wanted to push Gregor back into his room, then looked uncertainly around the living room, covered his eyes with his hands, and cried so that his mighty breast shook.
At this point, Gregor did not take one step into the room, but leaned his body from the inside against the firmly bolted door, so that only half his body was visible, as well as his head, tilted sideways, with which he peeped over at the others.
Meanwhile it had become much brighter; standing out clearly from the other side of the street was a part of the endless, gray-black house situated opposite—it was a hospital—with its severe windows regularly spaced across the front; the rain was still coming down, but only in large, individual drops visibly and firmly thrown down one by one onto the ground.
The breakfast dishes were sitting in abundant quantities on the table because the father held breakfast to be the most important meal of the day and let it drag on for hours by reading different newspapers.
On the wall directly opposite hung a photograph of Gregor from the time of his military service, depicting him as a lieutenant, as if he, with his hand on his fencing sword, smiling and worry free, demanded respect for his bearing and uniform.
The door to the hall was ajar, and since the door to the apartment was also open, one could see the apartment's landing and the first steps of the staircase leading down beyond.
“Now,” said Gregor, well aware that he was the only one who had kept any composure, “I'll promptly get dressed, pack up the collection of samples, and set off.
You all want, you all want to allow me to go on my way?
You see now, Attorney, sir, I am not stubborn, and I am happy to work; traveling is arduous, but without traveling, I couldn't live.
Where are you going, my dear Attorney?
To the office?
Really?
Will you report everything truthfully?
A person can be incapable of work momentarily, but that's precisely the time one should remember and consider earlier achievements, so that, after the obstacles have been removed, the person will work that much more industriously.
I am completely indebted to the supervisor, and this you know full well.
On the other hand, I have to provide for my parents and the sister.
I'm in a fix, but I'll work myself out of it again.
Don't make things more difficult for me than they already are.
Be my advocate in the office!
People don't like traveling salesmen, I know.
People think you can have a good life only by earning a bundle of money.
People don't even have any good reason to stop and think over this prejudice.
But you, my dear attorney, you have a better perspective on the circumstances of various people, even, I tell you in total confidence, a better perspective than the supervisor himself, who in his capacity as the employer is hardly bothered when he makes decisions that disadvantage his employees.
You also know well enough that the traveling salesman who is away from the office almost the entire year can so easily become a victim of rampant gossip, coincidences, and groundless complaints, against which it's impossible for him to defend himself and most of which he doesn't experience first-hand; and he finds this all out only when he's exhausted after finishing a trip, at home where terrible consequences of unknown origin begin to make themselves felt in his body.
Attorney, sir, don't go away without saying one word to me indicating that you think I'm at least partially right!”

But at Gregor's first words, the attorney had already turned away, and now he only looked back at Gregor, pursed his lips and shrugged his shoulders.
During Gregor's speech, he was not still for a moment, but kept inching his way towards the door without taking his eyes off Gregor, very gradually, as if there existed some secret ban on leaving the room.
He was already in the hall, and given the sudden movement with which he pulled his last foot out of the living room, one could have believed that he had just burned his soles.
In the hall, however, he stretched his right hand out away from his body towards the stairs outside, as if a heavenly deliverance were waiting for him there.
Gregor realized that he must not, under any circumstances, allow the attorney to go away with this opinion, especially if his position in the company were not to be placed in the greatest danger.
His parents didn't understand this well at all; over the long years, they had built up the conviction that he would be employed for life by this company, and, in addition, they had so much to do nowadays with their present troubles that they had lost all foresight.
But Gregor had this foresight.
The attorney must be stopped, calmed down, convinced, and finally won over; the future of Gregor and his family depended on it!
If only sister had been there!
She was clever; she had already cried while Gregor was still lying quietly on his back.
And the attorney, this ladies' man, would certainly be tractable for her; she'd have shut the door of the apartment and talked him out of his terror.
But the sister wasn't even there; Gregor had to handle it himself.
And without considering that he, as of yet, didn't know his current perambulatory abilities, and without thinking that his speech possibly—nay, probably—would still not be understood, he left the door and pushed himself through the opening He wanted to go over to the attorney, who was holding on with both hands to the banister in the forecourt in a completely laughable fashion, but immediately fell, looked for something to stop the fall, and with a weak cry came down upon his many little legs.
This had scarcely happened when he felt a sense of physical well-being for the first time that morning; the diminutive legs had a solid floor beneath them; they obeyed perfectly, he noticed to his joy, and even strove to carry him forward where he wanted; he already believed that the immediate alleviation of all his hardships was unequivocally before him.
But at the very moment when he lay on the floor, rocking back and forth with a repressed motion, quite close and directly across from his mother, she, who appeared so totally lost in her own thoughts, all of a sudden shot up with her arms spread wide and her fingers extended and cried out, “Help, for God's sake, help!” She held her head bowed down, as if she wanted to view Gregor better, and yet in spite of this, she senselessly ran backwards, forgetting that behind her stood the table with all the dishes on it; arriving at the table, she (as if she were absent-minded) sat down hurriedly on it and hardly appeared to notice that near her a stream of coffee was pouring forth onto the carpet from the large, toppled pot.
“Mother, mother,” said Gregor quietly, and looked over towards her.
The attorney fled momentarily from his mind; on the other hand, he could not keep himself from repeatedly snapping his jaws in the air at the sight of the flowing coffee.
At that his mother began her screaming all over again, fled from the table, and collapsed into the arms of his father, who was hurrying towards her.
But Gregor had no time right now for his parents; the attorney was already on the stairs; his chin level with the banister, the attorney looked back for the last time.
Gregor began sprinting to ensure that he caught up with him as soon as possible; the attorney must have suspected something, because he leapt down multiple steps and disappeared.
“Humph!” he then cried, and it rang throughout the entire stairwell.
Unfortunately, it appeared that the attorney's flight had completely bewildered father, who, up to this point, had been relatively composed; instead of running after the attorney or, at the very least, not hindering Gregor in his pursuit, he gripped the attorney's cane, which he had left behind on a stool with his hat and pullover, and with his left hand picked up a large newspaper from the table and attempted to drive Gregor back into his room by stamping his feet and swinging the cane and newspaper.
None of Gregor's pleas helped, and no plea was understood; no matter how humbly he hung his head, the father stamped more violently.
On the other side of the room, mother had, in spite of the cold weather, thrown open a window, and, leaning out, she put her hands on her face and thrust it far out of the window.
A strong draft arose from between the alley and the stairwell; the curtains flew up and the newspapers on the table rustled as individual pages drifted down to the floor.
The father pushed relentlessly forward, hissing like a wild savage.
Now Gregor as of yet had hardly any practice going backwards—it really went very slowly.
If Gregor had only been allowed to turn around, he would have been in his room immediately, but he feared that father would become impatient with the time-consuming process of turning around, and at every moment, a lethal blow from the cane in the father's hand threatened Gregor's head or back.
Eventually, there was really nothing else left for Gregor to do because he realized with horror that he no longer understood how to maintain a direction while going backwards.
So he began, while incessantly casting anxious sideways glances at the father, he began to turn himself around as quickly as possible (although in reality, however, this was quite slow).
Perhaps father noticed his good intentions, because he did not disturb him as he did this, instead conducting Gregor's rotation here and there from afar with the tip of his stick.
If only father weren't making that unbearable hissing noise!
Gregor was going out of his mind because of this.
He was ever at the point of being almost completely turned around, when, because of this hissing, he erred and turned back a bit.
When he was finally lucky enough to get his head before the doorway, it became apparent that his body was too wide to go through any further.
It naturally didn't occur to the father, in his present state of mind, to open the second of the two doors, for instance, in order to create a passage of sufficient width for Gregor to go through.
He was obsessed with the idea of getting Gregor into his room as quickly as possible.
Never would he have stood for the elaborate preparations that Gregor needed to get himself straight and, in this way, to go through the door.
Rather, as if there were no obstacles in the way, he drove Gregor forward with an exceptional noise; it hardly sounded to Gregor as if there were one single father behind him—this was really no fun now, and Gregor, come what may, forced himself in the door.
He raised the one side of his body, and lay on a slant in the doorway; his one flank was rubbed raw, ugly blotches were left on the white door, and soon he was stuck fast, since on his own, he couldn't stir because the little legs on one side were twitching up in the air and, on the other side, were painfully pressed to the floor—then the father came from behind and gave him a truly liberating and hefty push, and he flew, heavily bleeding, far into his room.
The door was slammed shut with the cane.
It was finally silent.
It was not until it was getting dark that evening that Gregor awoke from his deep and coma-like sleep.
He would have woken soon afterwards anyway even if he hadn’t been disturbed, as he had had enough sleep and felt fully rested.
But he had the impression that some hurried steps and the sound of the door leading into the front room being carefully shut had woken him.
The light from the electric street lamps shone palely here and there onto the ceiling and tops of the furniture, but down below, where Gregor was, it was dark.
He pushed himself over to the door, feeling his way clumsily with his antennae—of which he was now beginning to learn the value—in order to see what had been happening there.
The whole of his left side seemed like one, painfully stretched scar, and he limped badly on his two rows of legs.
One of the legs had been badly injured in the events of that morning—it was nearly a miracle that only one of them had been—and dragged along lifelessly.
It was only when he had reached the door that he realised what it actually was that had drawn him over to it; it was the smell of something to eat.
By the door there was a dish filled with sweetened milk with little pieces of white bread floating in it.
He was so pleased he almost laughed, as he was even hungrier than he had been that morning, and immediately dipped his head into the milk, nearly covering his eyes with it.
But he soon drew his head back again in disappointment; not only did the pain in his tender left side make it difficult to eat the food—he was only able to eat if his whole body worked together as a snuffling whole—but the milk did not taste at all nice.
Milk like this was normally his favourite drink, and his sister had certainly left it there for him because of that, but he turned, almost against his own will, away from the dish and crawled back into the centre of the room.
Through the crack in the door, Gregor could see that the gas had been lit in the living room.
His father at this time would normally be sat with his evening paper, reading it out in a loud voice to Gregor’s mother, and sometimes to his sister, but there was now not a sound to be heard.
Gregor’s sister would often write and tell him about this reading, but maybe his father had lost the habit in recent times.
It was so quiet all around too, even though there must have been somebody in the flat.
“What a quiet life it is the family lead”, said Gregor to himself, and, gazing into the darkness, felt a great pride that he was able to provide a life like that in such a nice home for his sister and parents.
But what now, if all this peace and wealth and comfort should come to a horrible and frightening end?
That was something that Gregor did not want to think about too much, so he started to move about, crawling up and down the room.
Once during that long evening, the door on one side of the room was opened very slightly and hurriedly closed again; later on the door on the other side did the same; it seemed that someone needed to enter the room but thought better of it.
Gregor went and waited immediately by the door, resolved either to bring the timorous visitor into the room in some way or at least to find out who it was; but the door was opened no more that night and Gregor waited in vain.
The previous morning while the doors were locked everyone had wanted to get in there to him, but now, now that he had opened up one of the doors and the other had clearly been unlocked some time during the day, no-one came, and the keys were in the other sides.
It was not until late at night that the gaslight in the living room was put out, and now it was easy to see that his parents and sister had stayed awake all that time, as they all could be distinctly heard as they went away together on tip-toe.
It was clear that no-one would come into Gregor’s room any more until morning; that gave him plenty of time to think undisturbed about how he would have to re-arrange his life.
For some reason, the tall, empty room where he was forced to remain made him feel uneasy as he lay there flat on the floor, even though he had been living in it for five years.
Hardly aware of what he was doing other than a slight feeling of shame, he hurried under the couch.
It pressed down on his back a little, and he was no longer able to lift his head, but he nonetheless felt immediately at ease and his only regret was that his body was too broad to get it all underneath.
He spent the whole night there.
Some of the time he passed in a light sleep, although he frequently woke from it in alarm because of his hunger, and some of the time was spent in worries and vague hopes which, however, always led to the same conclusion: for the time being he must remain calm, he must show patience and the greatest consideration so that his family could bear the unpleasantness that he, in his present condition, was forced to impose on them.
Gregor soon had the opportunity to test the strength of his decisions, as early the next morning, almost before the night had ended, his sister, nearly fully dressed, opened the door from the front room and looked anxiously in.
She did not see him straight away, but when she did notice him under the couch—he had to be somewhere, for God’s sake, he couldn’t have flown away—she was so shocked that she lost control of herself and slammed the door shut again from outside.
But she seemed to regret her behaviour, as she opened the door again straight away and came in on tip-toe as if entering the room of someone seriously ill or even of a stranger.
Gregor had pushed his head forward, right to the edge of the couch, and watched her.
Would she notice that he had left the milk as it was, realise that it was not from any lack of hunger and bring him in some other food that was more suitable?
If she didn’t do it herself he would rather go hungry than draw her attention to it, although he did feel a terrible urge to rush forward from under the couch, throw himself at his sister’s feet and beg her for something good to eat.
However, his sister noticed the full dish immediately and looked at it and the few drops of milk splashed around it with some surprise.
She immediately picked it up—using a rag, not her bare hands—and carried it out.
Gregor was extremely curious as to what she would bring in its place, imagining the wildest possibilities, but he never could have guessed what his sister, in her goodness, actually did bring.
In order to test his taste, she brought him a whole selection of things, all spread out on an old newspaper.
There were old, half-rotten vegetables; bones from the evening meal, covered in white sauce that had gone hard; a few raisins and almonds; some cheese that Gregor had declared inedible two days before; a dry roll and some bread spread with butter and salt.
As well as all that she had poured some water into the dish, which had probably been permanently set aside for Gregor’s use, and placed it beside them.
Then, out of consideration for Gregor’s feelings, as she knew that he would not eat in front of her, she hurried out again and even turned the key in the lock so that Gregor would know he could make things as comfortable for himself as he liked.
Gregor’s little legs whirred, at last he could eat.
What’s more, his injuries must already have completely healed as he found no difficulty in moving.
This amazed him, as more than a month earlier he had cut his finger slightly with a knife, he thought of how his finger had still hurt the day before yesterday.
“Am I less sensitive than I used to be, then?”, he thought, and was already sucking greedily at the cheese which had immediately, almost compellingly, attracted him much more than the other foods on the newspaper.
Quickly one after another, his eyes watering with pleasure, he consumed the cheese, the vegetables and the sauce; the fresh foods, on the other hand, he didn’t like at all, and even dragged the things he did want to eat a little way away from them because he couldn’t stand the smell.
Long after he had finished eating and lay lethargic in the same place, his sister slowly turned the key in the lock as a sign to him that he should withdraw.
He was immediately startled, although he had been half asleep, and he hurried back under the couch.
But he needed great self-control to stay there even for the short time that his sister was in the room, as eating so much food had rounded out his body a little and he could hardly breathe in that narrow space.
Half suffocating, he watched with bulging eyes as his sister unselfconsciously took a broom and swept up the left-overs, mixing them in with the food he had not even touched at all as if it could not be used any more.
She quickly dropped it all into a bin, closed it with its wooden lid, and carried everything out.
She had hardly turned her back before Gregor came out again from under the couch and stretched himself.
This was how Gregor received his food each day now, once in the morning while his parents and the maid were still asleep, and the second time after everyone had eaten their meal at midday as his parents would sleep for a little while then as well, and Gregor’s sister would send the maid away on some errand.
Gregor’s father and mother certainly did not want him to starve either, but perhaps it would have been more than they could stand to have any more experience of his feeding than being told about it, and perhaps his sister wanted to spare them what distress she could as they were indeed suffering enough.
It was impossible for Gregor to find out what they had told the doctor and the locksmith that first morning to get them out of the flat.
As nobody could understand him, nobody, not even his sister, thought that he could understand them, so he had to be content to hear his sister’s sighs and appeals to the saints as she moved about his room.
It was only later, when she had become a little more used to everything—there was, of course, no question of her ever becoming fully used to the situation—that Gregor would sometimes catch a friendly comment, or at least a comment that could be construed as friendly.
“He’s enjoyed his dinner today”, she might say when he had diligently cleared away all the food left for him, or if he left most of it, which slowly became more and more frequent, she would often say, sadly, “now everything’s just been left there again”.
Although Gregor wasn’t able to hear any news directly he did listen to much of what was said in the next rooms, and whenever he heard anyone speaking he would scurry straight to the appropriate door and press his whole body against it.
There was seldom any conversation, especially at first, that was not about him in some way, even if only in secret.
For two whole days, all the talk at every mealtime was about what they should do now; but even between meals they spoke about the same subject as there were always at least two members of the family at home—nobody wanted to be at home by themselves and it was out of the question to leave the flat entirely empty.
And on the very first day the maid had fallen to her knees and begged Gregor’s mother to let her go without delay.
It was not very clear how much she knew of what had happened but she left within a quarter of an hour, tearfully thanking Gregor’s mother for her dismissal as if she had done her an enormous service.
She even swore emphatically not to tell anyone the slightest about what had happened, even though no-one had asked that of her.
Now Gregor’s sister also had to help his mother with the cooking; although that was not so much bother as no-one ate very much.
Gregor often heard how one of them would unsuccessfully urge another to eat, and receive no more answer than “no thanks, I’ve had enough” or something similar.
No-one drank very much either.
His sister would sometimes ask his father whether he would like a beer, hoping for the chance to go and fetch it herself.
When his father then said nothing she would add, so that he would not feel selfish, that she could send the housekeeper for it, but then his father would close the matter with a big, loud “No”, and no more would be said.
Even before the first day had come to an end, his father had explained to Gregor’s mother and sister what their finances and prospects were.
Now and then he stood up from the table and took some receipt or document from the little cash box he had saved from his business when it had collapsed five years earlier.
Gregor heard how he opened the complicated lock and then closed it again after he had taken the item he wanted.
What he heard his father say was some of the first good news that Gregor heard since he had first been incarcerated in his room.
He had thought that nothing at all remained from his father’s business, at least he had never told him anything different, and Gregor had never asked him about it anyway.
Their business misfortune had reduced the family to a state of total despair, and Gregor’s only concern at that time had been to arrange things so that they could all forget about it as quickly as possible.
So then he started working especially hard, with a fiery vigour that raised him from a junior salesman to a travelling representative almost overnight, bringing with it the chance to earn money in quite different ways.
Gregor converted his success at work straight into cash that he could lay on the table at home for the benefit of his astonished and delighted family.
They had been good times and they had never come again, at least not with the same splendour, even though Gregor had later earned so much that he was in a position to bear the costs of the whole family, and did bear them.
They had even got used to it, both Gregor and the family, they took the money with gratitude and he was glad to provide it, although there was no longer much warm affection given in return.
Gregor only remained close to his sister now.
Unlike him, she was very fond of music and a gifted and expressive violinist, it was his secret plan to send her to the conservatory next year even though it would cause great expense that would have to be made up for in some other way.
During Gregor’s short periods in town, conversation with his sister would often turn to the conservatory but it was only ever mentioned as a lovely dream that could never be realised.
Their parents did not like to hear this innocent talk, but Gregor thought about it quite hard and decided he would let them know what he planned with a grand announcement of it on Christmas day.
That was the sort of totally pointless thing that went through his mind in his present state, pressed upright against the door and listening.
There were times when he simply became too tired to continue listening, when his head would fall wearily against the door and he would pull it up again with a start, as even the slightest noise he caused would be heard next door and they would all go silent.
“What’s that he’s doing now”, his father would say after a while, clearly having gone over to the door, and only then would the interrupted conversation slowly be taken up again.
When explaining things, his father repeated himself several times, partly because it was a long time since he had been occupied with these matters himself and partly because Gregor’s mother did not understand everything the first time.
From these repeated explanations Gregor learned, to his pleasure, that despite all their misfortunes there was still some money available from the old days.
It was not a lot, but it had not been touched in the meantime and some interest had accumulated.
Besides that, they had not been using up all the money that Gregor had been bringing home every month, keeping only a little for himself, so that that, too, had been accumulating.
Behind the door, Gregor nodded with enthusiasm in his pleasure at this unexpected thrift and caution.
He could actually have used this surplus money to reduce his father’s debt to his boss, and the day when he could have freed himself from that job would have come much closer, but now it was certainly better the way his father had done things.
This money, however, was certainly not enough to enable the family to live off the interest; it was enough to maintain them for, perhaps, one or two years, no more.
That’s to say, it was money that should not really be touched but set aside for emergencies; money to live on had to be earned.
His father was healthy but old, and lacking in self confidence.
During the five years that he had not been working—the first holiday in a life that had been full of strain and no success—he had put on a lot of weight and become very slow and clumsy.
Would Gregor’s elderly mother now have to go and earn money?
She suffered from asthma and it was a strain for her just to move about the home, every other day would be spent struggling for breath on the sofa by the open window.
Would his sister have to go and earn money?
She was still a child of seventeen, her life up till then had been very enviable, consisting of wearing nice clothes, sleeping late, helping out in the business, joining in with a few modest pleasures and most of all playing the violin.
Whenever they began to talk of the need to earn money, Gregor would always first let go of the door and then throw himself onto the cool, leather sofa next to it, as he became quite hot with shame and regret.
He would often lie there the whole night through, not sleeping a wink but scratching at the leather for hours on end.
Or he might go to all the effort of pushing a chair to the window, climbing up onto the sill and, propped up in the chair, leaning on the window to stare out of it.
He had used to feel a great sense of freedom from doing this, but doing it now was obviously something more remembered than experienced, as what he actually saw in this way was becoming less distinct every day, even things that were quite near; he had used to curse the ever-present view of the hospital across the street, but now he could not see it at all, and if he had not known that he lived in Charlottenstrasse, which was a quiet street despite being in the middle of the city, he could have thought that he was looking out the window at a barren waste where the grey sky and the grey earth mingled inseparably.
His observant sister only needed to notice the chair twice before she would always push it back to its exact position by the window after she had tidied up the room, and even left the inner pane of the window open from then on.
If Gregor had only been able to speak to his sister and thank her for all that she had to do for him it would have been easier for him to bear it; but as it was it caused him pain.
His sister, naturally, tried as far as possible to pretend there was nothing burdensome about it, and the longer it went on, of course, the better she was able to do so, but as time went by Gregor was also able to see through it all so much better.
It had even become very unpleasant for him, now, whenever she entered the room.
No sooner had she come in than she would quickly close the door as a precaution so that no-one would have to suffer the view into Gregor’s room, then she would go straight to the window and pull it hurriedly open almost as if she were suffocating.
Even if it was cold, she would stay at the window breathing deeply for a little while.
She would alarm Gregor twice a day with this running about and noise making; he would stay under the couch shivering the whole while, knowing full well that she would certainly have liked to spare him this ordeal, but it was impossible for her to be in the same room with him with the windows closed.
One day, about a month after Gregor’s transformation when his sister no longer had any particular reason to be shocked at his appearance, she came into the room a little earlier than usual and found him still staring out the window, motionless, and just where he would be most horrible.
In itself, his sister’s not coming into the room would have been no surprise for Gregor as it would have been difficult for her to immediately open the window while he was still there, but not only did she not come in, she went straight back and closed the door behind her, a stranger would have thought he had threatened her and tried to bite her.
Gregor went straight to hide himself under the couch, of course, but he had to wait until midday before his sister came back and she seemed much more uneasy than usual.
It made him realise that she still found his appearance unbearable and would continue to do so, she probably even had to overcome the urge to flee when she saw the little bit of him that protruded from under the couch.
One day, in order to spare her even this sight, he spent four hours carrying the bedsheet over to the couch on his back and arranged it so that he was completely covered and his sister would not be able to see him even if she bent down.
If she did not think this sheet was necessary then all she had to do was take it off again, as it was clear enough that it was no pleasure for Gregor to cut himself off so completely.
She left the sheet where it was.
Gregor even thought he glimpsed a look of gratitude one time when he carefully looked out from under the sheet to see how his sister liked the new arrangement.
For the first fourteen days, Gregor’s parents could not bring themselves to come into the room to see him.
He would often hear them say how they appreciated all the new work his sister was doing even though, before, they had seen her as a girl who was somewhat useless and frequently been annoyed with her.
But now the two of them, father and mother, would often both wait outside the door of Gregor’s room while his sister tidied up in there, and as soon as she went out again she would have to tell them exactly how everything looked, what Gregor had eaten, how he had behaved this time and whether, perhaps, any slight improvement could be seen.
His mother also wanted to go in and visit Gregor relatively soon but his father and sister at first persuaded her against it.
Gregor listened very closely to all this, and approved fully.
Later, though, she had to be held back by force, which made her call out: “Let me go and see Gregor, he is my unfortunate son!
Can’t you understand I have to see him?”, and Gregor would think to himself that maybe it would be better if his mother came in, not every day of course, but one day a week, perhaps; she could understand everything much better than his sister who, for all her courage, was still just a child after all, and really might not have had an adult’s appreciation of the burdensome job she had taken on.
Gregor’s wish to see his mother was soon realised.
Out of consideration for his parents, Gregor wanted to avoid being seen at the window during the day, the few square meters of the floor did not give him much room to crawl about, it was hard to just lie quietly through the night, his food soon stopped giving him any pleasure at all, and so, to entertain himself, he got into the habit of crawling up and down the walls and ceiling.
He was especially fond of hanging from the ceiling; it was quite different from lying on the floor; he could breathe more freely; his body had a light swing to it; and up there, relaxed and almost happy, it might happen that he would surprise even himself by letting go of the ceiling and landing on the floor with a crash.
But now, of course, he had far better control of his body than before and, even with a fall as great as that, caused himself no damage.
Very soon his sister noticed Gregor’s new way of entertaining himself—he had, after all, left traces of the adhesive from his feet as he crawled about—and got it into her head to make it as easy as possible for him by removing the furniture that got in his way, especially the chest of drawers and the desk.
Now, this was not something that she would be able to do by herself; she did not dare to ask for help from her father; the sixteen year old maid had carried on bravely since the cook had left but she certainly would not have helped in this, she had even asked to be allowed to keep the kitchen locked at all times and never to have to open the door unless it was especially important; so his sister had no choice but to choose some time when Gregor’s father was not there and fetch his mother to help her.
As she approached the room, Gregor could hear his mother express her joy, but once at the door she went silent.
First, of course, his sister came in and looked round to see that everything in the room was alright; and only then did she let her mother enter.
Gregor had hurriedly pulled the sheet down lower over the couch and put more folds into it so that everything really looked as if it had just been thrown down by chance.
Gregor also refrained, this time, from spying out from under the sheet; he gave up the chance to see his mother until later and was simply glad that she had come.
“You can come in, he can’t be seen”, said his sister, obviously leading her in by the hand.
The old chest of drawers was too heavy for a pair of feeble women to be heaving about, but Gregor listened as they pushed it from its place, his sister always taking on the heaviest part of the work for herself and ignoring her mother’s warnings that she would strain herself.
This lasted a very long time.
After labouring at it for fifteen minutes or more his mother said it would be better to leave the chest where it was, for one thing it was too heavy for them to get the job finished before Gregor’s father got home and leaving it in the middle of the room it would be in his way even more, and for another thing it wasn’t even sure that taking the furniture away would really be any help to him.
She thought just the opposite; the sight of the bare walls saddened her right to her heart; and why wouldn’t Gregor feel the same way about it, he’d been used to this furniture in his room for a long time and it would make him feel abandoned to be in an empty room like that.
Then, quietly, almost whispering as if wanting Gregor (whose whereabouts she did not know) to hear not even the tone of her voice, as she was convinced that he did not understand her words, she added “and by taking the furniture away, won’t it seem like we’re showing that we’ve given up all hope of improvement and we’re abandoning him to cope for himself?
I think it’d be best to leave the room exactly the way it was before so that when Gregor comes back to us again he’ll find everything unchanged and he’ll be able to forget the time in between all the easier”.
Hearing these words from his mother made Gregor realise that the lack of any direct human communication, along with the monotonous life led by the family during these two months, must have made him confused—he could think of no other way of explaining to himself why he had seriously wanted his room emptied out.
Had he really wanted to transform his room into a cave, a warm room fitted out with the nice furniture he had inherited?
That would have let him crawl around unimpeded in any direction, but it would also have let him quickly forget his past when he had still been human.
He had come very close to forgetting, and it had only been the voice of his mother, unheard for so long, that had shaken him out of it.
Nothing should be removed; everything had to stay; he could not do without the good influence the furniture had on his condition; and if the furniture made it difficult for him to crawl about mindlessly that was not a loss but a great advantage.
His sister, unfortunately, did not agree; she had become used to the idea, not without reason, that she was Gregor’s spokesman to his parents about the things that concerned him.
This meant that his mother’s advice now was sufficient reason for her to insist on removing not only the chest of drawers and the desk, as she had thought at first, but all the furniture apart from the all-important couch.
It was more than childish perversity, of course, or the unexpected confidence she had recently acquired, that made her insist; she had indeed noticed that Gregor needed a lot of room to crawl about in, whereas the furniture, as far as anyone could see, was of no use to him at all.
Girls of that age, though, do become enthusiastic about things and feel they must get their way whenever they can.
Perhaps this was what tempted Grete to make Gregor’s situation seem even more shocking than it was so that she could do even more for him.
Grete would probably be the only one who would dare enter a room dominated by Gregor crawling about the bare walls by himself.
So she refused to let her mother dissuade her.
Gregor’s mother already looked uneasy in his room, she soon stopped speaking and helped Gregor’s sister to get the chest of drawers out with what strength she had.
The chest of drawers was something that Gregor could do without if he had to, but the writing desk had to stay.
Hardly had the two women pushed the chest of drawers, groaning, out of the room than Gregor poked his head out from under the couch to see what he could do about it.
He meant to be as careful and considerate as he could, but, unfortunately, it was his mother who came back first while Grete in the next room had her arms round the chest, pushing and pulling at it from side to side by herself without, of course, moving it an inch.
His mother was not used to the sight of Gregor, he might have made her ill, so Gregor hurried backwards to the far end of the couch.
In his startlement, though, he was not able to prevent the sheet at its front from moving a little.
It was enough to attract his mother’s attention.
She stood very still, remained there a moment, and then went back out to Grete.
Gregor kept trying to assure himself that nothing unusual was happening, it was just a few pieces of furniture being moved after all, but he soon had to admit that the women going to and fro, their little calls to each other, the scraping of the furniture on the floor, all these things made him feel as if he were being assailed from all sides.
With his head and legs pulled in against him and his body pressed to the floor, he was forced to admit to himself that he could not stand all of this much longer.
They were emptying his room out; taking away everything that was dear to him; they had already taken out the chest containing his fretsaw and other tools; now they threatened to remove the writing desk with its place clearly worn into the floor, the desk where he had done his homework as a business trainee, at high school, even while he had been at infant school—he really could not wait any longer to see whether the two women’s intentions were good.
He had nearly forgotten they were there anyway, as they were now too tired to say anything while they worked and he could only hear their feet as they stepped heavily on the floor.
So, while the women were leant against the desk in the other room catching their breath, he sallied out, changed direction four times not knowing what he should save first before his attention was suddenly caught by the picture on the wall—which was already denuded of everything else that had been on it—of the lady dressed in copious fur.
He hurried up onto the picture and pressed himself against its glass, it held him firmly and felt good on his hot belly.
This picture at least, now totally covered by Gregor, would certainly be taken away by no-one.
He turned his head to face the door into the living room so that he could watch the women when they came back.
They had not allowed themselves a long rest and came back quite soon; Grete had put her arm around her mother and was nearly carrying her.
“What shall we take now, then?”, said Grete and looked around.
Her eyes met those of Gregor on the wall.
Perhaps only because her mother was there, she remained calm, bent her face to her so that she would not look round and said, albeit hurriedly and with a tremor in her voice: “Come on, let’s go back in the living room for a while?” Gregor could see what Grete had in mind, she wanted to take her mother somewhere safe and then chase him down from the wall.
Well, she could certainly try it!
He sat unyielding on his picture.
He would rather jump at Grete’s face.
But Grete’s words had made her mother quite worried, she stepped to one side, saw the enormous brown patch against the flowers of the wallpaper, and before she even realised it was Gregor that she saw screamed: “Oh God, oh God!” Arms outstretched, she fell onto the couch as if she had given up everything and stayed there immobile.
“Gregor!” shouted his sister, glowering at him and shaking her fist.
That was the first word she had spoken to him directly since his transformation.
She ran into the other room to fetch some kind of smelling salts to bring her mother out of her faint; Gregor wanted to help too—he could save his picture later, although he stuck fast to the glass and had to pull himself off by force; then he, too, ran into the next room as if he could advise his sister like in the old days; but he had to just stand behind her doing nothing; she was looking into various bottles, he startled her when she turned round; a bottle fell to the ground and broke; a splinter cut Gregor’s face, some kind of caustic medicine splashed all over him; now, without delaying any longer, Grete took hold of all the bottles she could and ran with them in to her mother; she slammed the door shut with her foot.
So now Gregor was shut out from his mother, who, because of him, might be near to death; he could not open the door if he did not want to chase his sister away, and she had to stay with his mother; there was nothing for him to do but wait; and, oppressed with anxiety and self-reproach, he began to crawl about, he crawled over everything, walls, furniture, ceiling, and finally in his confusion as the whole room began to spin around him he fell down into the middle of the dinner table.
He lay there for a while, numb and immobile, all around him it was quiet, maybe that was a good sign.
Then there was someone at the door.
The maid, of course, had locked herself in her kitchen so that Grete would have to go and answer it.
His father had arrived home.
“What’s happened?” were his first words; Grete’s appearance must have made everything clear to him.
She answered him with subdued voice, and openly pressed her face into his chest: “Mother’s fainted, but she’s better now.
Gregor got out.” “Just as I expected”, said his father, “just as I always said, but you women wouldn’t listen, would you.” It was clear to Gregor that Grete had not said enough and that his father took it to mean that something bad had happened, that he was responsible for some act of violence.
That meant Gregor would now have to try to calm his father, as he did not have the time to explain things to him even if that had been possible.
So he fled to the door of his room and pressed himself against it so that his father, when he came in from the hall, could see straight away that Gregor had the best intentions and would go back into his room without delay, that it would not be necessary to drive him back but that they had only to open the door and he would disappear.
His father, though, was not in the mood to notice subtleties like that; “Ah!”, he shouted as he came in, sounding as if he were both angry and glad at the same time.
Gregor drew his head back from the door and lifted it towards his father.
He really had not imagined his father the way he stood there now; of late, with his new habit of crawling about, he had neglected to pay attention to what was going on the rest of the flat the way he had done before.
He really ought to have expected things to have changed, but still, still, was that really his father?
The same tired man as used to be laying there entombed in his bed when Gregor came back from his business trips, who would receive him sitting in the armchair in his nightgown when he came back in the evenings; who was hardly even able to stand up but, as a sign of his pleasure, would just raise his arms and who, on the couple of times a year when they went for a walk together on a Sunday or public holiday wrapped up tightly in his overcoat between Gregor and his mother, would always labour his way forward a little more slowly than them, who were already walking slowly for his sake; who would place his stick down carefully and, if he wanted to say something would invariably stop and gather his companions around him.
He was standing up straight enough now; dressed in a smart blue uniform with gold buttons, the sort worn by the employees at the banking institute; above the high, stiff collar of the coat his strong double-chin emerged; under the bushy eyebrows, his piercing, dark eyes looked out fresh and alert; his normally unkempt white hair was combed down painfully close to his scalp.
He took his cap, with its gold monogram from, probably, some bank, and threw it in an arc right across the room onto the sofa, put his hands in his trouser pockets, pushing back the bottom of his long uniform coat, and, with look of determination, walked towards Gregor.
He probably did not even know himself what he had in mind, but nonetheless lifted his feet unusually high.
Gregor was amazed at the enormous size of the soles of his boots, but wasted no time with that—he knew full well, right from the first day of his new life, that his father thought it necessary to always be extremely strict with him.
And so he ran up to his father, stopped when his father stopped, scurried forwards again when he moved, even slightly.
In this way they went round the room several times without anything decisive happening, without even giving the impression of a chase as everything went so slowly.
Gregor remained all this time on the floor, largely because he feared his father might see it as especially provoking if he fled onto the wall or ceiling.
Whatever he did, Gregor had to admit that he certainly would not be able to keep up this running about for long, as for each step his father took he had to carry out countless movements.
He became noticeably short of breath, even in his earlier life his lungs had not been very reliable.
Now, as he lurched about in his efforts to muster all the strength he could for running he could hardly keep his eyes open; his thoughts became too slow for him to think of any other way of saving himself than running; he almost forgot that the walls were there for him to use although, here, they were concealed behind carefully carved furniture full of notches and protrusions—then, right beside him, lightly tossed, something flew down and rolled in front of him.
It was an apple; then another one immediately flew at him; Gregor froze in shock; there was no longer any point in running as his father had decided to bombard him.
He had filled his pockets with fruit from the bowl on the sideboard and now, without even taking the time for careful aim, threw one apple after another.
These little, red apples rolled about on the floor, knocking into each other as if they had electric motors.
An apple thrown without much force glanced against Gregor’s back and slid off without doing any harm.
Another one however, immediately following it, hit squarely and lodged in his back; Gregor wanted to drag himself away, as if he could remove the surprising, the incredible pain by changing his position; but he felt as if nailed to the spot and spread himself out, all his senses in confusion.
The last thing he saw was the door of his room being pulled open, his sister was screaming, his mother ran out in front of her in her blouse (as his sister had taken off some of her clothes after she had fainted to make it easier for her to breathe), she ran to his father, her skirts unfastened and sliding one after another to the ground, stumbling over the skirts she pushed herself to his father, her arms around him, uniting herself with him totally—now Gregor lost his ability to see anything—her hands behind his father’s head begging him to spare Gregor’s life.
No-one dared to remove the apple lodged in Gregor’s flesh, so it remained there as a visible reminder of his injury.
He had suffered it there for more than a month, and his condition seemed serious enough to remind even his father that Gregor, despite his current sad and revolting form, was a family member who could not be treated as an enemy.
On the contrary, as a family there was a duty to swallow any revulsion for him and to be patient, just to be patient.
Because of his injuries, Gregor had lost much of his mobility—probably permanently.
He had been reduced to the condition of an ancient invalid and it took him long, long minutes to crawl across his room—crawling over the ceiling was out of the question—but this deterioration in his condition was fully (in his opinion) made up for by the door to the living room being left open every evening.
He got into the habit of closely watching it for one or two hours before it was opened and then, lying in the darkness of his room where he could not be seen from the living room, he could watch the family in the light of the dinner table and listen to their conversation—with everyone’s permission, in a way, and thus quite differently from before.
They no longer held the lively conversations of earlier times, of course, the ones that Gregor always thought about with longing when he was tired and getting into the damp bed in some small hotel room.
All of them were usually very quiet nowadays.
Soon after dinner, his father would go to sleep in his chair; his mother and sister would urge each other to be quiet; his mother, bent deeply under the lamp, would sew fancy underwear for a fashion shop; his sister, who had taken a sales job, learned shorthand and French in the evenings so that she might be able to get a better position later on.
Sometimes his father would wake up and say to Gregor’s mother “you’re doing so much sewing again today!”, as if he did not know that he had been dozing—and then he would go back to sleep again while mother and sister would exchange a tired grin.
With a kind of stubbornness, Gregor’s father refused to take his uniform off even at home; while his nightgown hung unused on its peg Gregor’s father would slumber where he was, fully dressed, as if always ready to serve and expecting to hear the voice of his superior even here.
The uniform had not been new to start with, but as a result of this it slowly became even shabbier despite the efforts of Gregor’s mother and sister to look after it.
Gregor would often spend the whole evening looking at all the stains on this coat, with its gold buttons always kept polished and shiny, while the old man in it would sleep, highly uncomfortable but peaceful.
As soon as it struck ten, Gregor’s mother would speak gently to his father to wake him and try to persuade him to go to bed, as he couldn’t sleep properly where he was and he really had to get his sleep if he was to be up at six to get to work.
But since he had been in work he had become more obstinate and would always insist on staying longer at the table, even though he regularly fell asleep and it was then harder than ever to persuade him to exchange the chair for his bed.
Then, however much mother and sister would importune him with little reproaches and warnings he would keep slowly shaking his head for a quarter of an hour with his eyes closed and refusing to get up.
Gregor’s mother would tug at his sleeve, whisper endearments into his ear, Gregor’s sister would leave her work to help her mother, but nothing would have any effect on him.
He would just sink deeper into his chair.
Only when the two women took him under the arms he would abruptly open his eyes, look at them one after the other and say: “What a life!
This is what peace I get in my old age!” And supported by the two women he would lift himself up carefully as if he were carrying the greatest load himself, let the women take him to the door, send them off and carry on by himself while Gregor’s mother would throw down her needle and his sister her pen so that they could run after his father and continue being of help to him.
Who, in this tired and overworked family, would have had time to give more attention to Gregor than was absolutely necessary?
The household budget became even smaller; so now the maid was dismissed; an enormous, thick-boned charwoman with white hair that flapped around her head came every morning and evening to do the heaviest work; everything else was looked after by Gregor’s mother on top of the large amount of sewing work she did.
Gregor even learned, listening to the evening conversation about what price they had hoped for, that several items of jewellery belonging to the family had been sold, even though both mother and sister had been very fond of wearing them at functions and celebrations.
But the loudest complaint was that although the flat was much too big for their present circumstances, they could not move out of it, there was no imaginable way of transferring Gregor to the new address.
He could see quite well, though, that there were more reasons than consideration for him that made it difficult for them to move, it would have been quite easy to transport him in any suitable crate with a few air holes in it; the main thing holding the family back from their decision to move was much more to do with their total despair, and the thought that they had been struck with a misfortune unlike anything experienced by anyone else they knew or were related to.
They carried out absolutely everything that the world expects from poor people, Gregor’s father brought bank employees their breakfast, his mother sacrificed herself by washing clothes for strangers, his sister ran back and forth behind her desk at the behest of the customers, but they just did not have the strength to do any more.
And the injury in Gregor’s back began to hurt as much as when it was new.
After they had come back from taking his father to bed Gregor’s mother and sister would now leave their work where it was and sit close together, cheek to cheek; his mother would point to Gregor’s room and say “Close that door, Grete”, and then, when he was in the dark again, they would sit in the next room and their tears would mingle, or they would simply sit there staring dry-eyed at the table.
Gregor hardly slept at all, either night or day.
Sometimes he would think of taking over the family’s affairs, just like before, the next time the door was opened; he had long forgotten about his boss and the chief clerk, but they would appear again in his thoughts, the salesmen and the apprentices, that stupid teaboy, two or three friends from other businesses, one of the chambermaids from a provincial hotel, a tender memory that appeared and disappeared again, a cashier from a hat shop for whom his attention had been serious but too slow,—all of them appeared to him, mixed together with strangers and others he had forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family they were all of them inaccessible, and he was glad when they disappeared.
Other times he was not at all in the mood to look after his family, he was filled with simple rage about the lack of attention he was shown, and although he could think of nothing he would have wanted, he made plans of how he could get into the pantry where he could take all the things he was entitled to, even if he was not hungry.
Gregor’s sister no longer thought about how she could please him but would hurriedly push some food or other into his room with her foot before she rushed out to work in the morning and at midday, and in the evening she would sweep it away again with the broom, indifferent as to whether it had been eaten or—more often than not—had been left totally untouched.
She still cleared up the room in the evening, but now she could not have been any quicker about it.
Smears of dirt were left on the walls, here and there were little balls of dust and filth.
At first, Gregor went into one of the worst of these places when his sister arrived as a reproach to her, but he could have stayed there for weeks without his sister doing anything about it; she could see the dirt as well as he could but she had simply decided to leave him to it.
At the same time she became touchy in a way that was quite new for her and which everyone in the family understood—cleaning up Gregor’s room was for her and her alone.
Gregor’s mother did once thoroughly clean his room, and needed to use several bucketfuls of water to do it—although that much dampness also made Gregor ill and he lay flat on the couch, bitter and immobile.
But his mother was to be punished still more for what she had done, as hardly had his sister arrived home in the evening than she noticed the change in Gregor’s room and, highly aggrieved, ran back into the living room where, despite her mothers raised and imploring hands, she broke into convulsive tears.
Her father, of course, was startled out of his chair and the two parents looked on astonished and helpless; then they, too, became agitated; Gregor’s father, standing to the right of his mother, accused her of not leaving the cleaning of Gregor’s room to his sister; from her left, Gregor’s sister screamed at her that she was never to clean Gregor’s room again; while his mother tried to draw his father, who was beside himself with anger, into the bedroom; his sister, quaking with tears, thumped on the table with her small fists; and Gregor hissed in anger that no-one had even thought of closing the door to save him the sight of this and all its noise.
Gregor’s sister was exhausted from going out to work, and looking after Gregor as she had done before was even more work for her, but even so his mother ought certainly not to have taken her place.
Gregor, on the other hand, ought not to be neglected.
Now, though, the charwoman was here.
This elderly widow, with a robust bone structure that made her able to withstand the hardest of things in her long life, wasn’t really repelled by Gregor.
Just by chance one day, rather than any real curiosity, she opened the door to Gregor’s room and found herself face to face with him.
He was taken totally by surprise, no-one was chasing him but he began to rush to and fro while she just stood there in amazement with her hands crossed in front of her.
From then on she never failed to open the door slightly every evening and morning and look briefly in on him.
At first she would call to him as she did so with words that she probably considered friendly, such as “come on then, you old dung-beetle!”, or “look at the old dung-beetle there!” Gregor never responded to being spoken to in that way, but just remained where he was without moving as if the door had never even been opened.
If only they had told this charwoman to clean up his room every day instead of letting her disturb him for no reason whenever she felt like it!
One day, early in the morning while a heavy rain struck the windowpanes, perhaps indicating that spring was coming, she began to speak to him in that way once again.
Gregor was so resentful of it that he started to move toward her, he was slow and infirm, but it was like a kind of attack.
Instead of being afraid, the charwoman just lifted up one of the chairs from near the door and stood there with her mouth open, clearly intending not to close her mouth until the chair in her hand had been slammed down into Gregor’s back.
“Aren’t you coming any closer, then?”, she asked when Gregor turned round again, and she calmly put the chair back in the corner.
Gregor had almost entirely stopped eating.
Only if he happened to find himself next to the food that had been prepared for him he might take some of it into his mouth to play with it, leave it there a few hours and then, more often than not, spit it out again.
At first he thought it was distress at the state of his room that stopped him eating, but he had soon got used to the changes made there.
They had got into the habit of putting things into this room that they had no room for anywhere else, and there were now many such things as one of the rooms in the flat had been rented out to three gentlemen.
These earnest gentlemen—all three of them had full beards, as Gregor learned peering through the crack in the door one day—were painfully insistent on things’ being tidy.
This meant not only in their own room but, since they had taken a room in this establishment, in the entire flat and especially in the kitchen.
Unnecessary clutter was something they could not tolerate, especially if it was dirty.
They had moreover brought most of their own furnishings and equipment with them.
For this reason, many things had become superfluous which, although they could not be sold, the family did not wish to discard.
All these things found their way into Gregor’s room.
The dustbins from the kitchen found their way in there too.
The charwoman was always in a hurry, and anything she couldn’t use for the time being she would just chuck in there.
He, fortunately, would usually see no more than the object and the hand that held it.
The woman most likely meant to fetch the things back out again when she had time and the opportunity, or to throw everything out in one go, but what actually happened was that they were left where they landed when they had first been thrown unless Gregor made his way through the junk and moved it somewhere else.
At first he moved it because, with no other room free where he could crawl about, he was forced to, but later on he came to enjoy it although moving about in that way left him sad and tired to death, and he would remain immobile for hours afterwards.
The gentlemen who rented the room would sometimes take their evening meal at home in the living room that was used by everyone, and so the door to this room was often kept closed in the evening.
But Gregor found it easy to give up having the door open, he had, after all, often failed to make use of it when it was open and, without the family having noticed it, lain in his room in its darkest corner.
One time, though, the charwoman left the door to the living room slightly open, and it remained open when the gentlemen who rented the room came in in the evening and the light was put on.
They sat up at the table where, formerly, Gregor had taken his meals with his father and mother, they unfolded the serviettes and picked up their knives and forks.
Gregor’s mother immediately appeared in the doorway with a dish of meat and soon behind her came his sister with a dish piled high with potatoes.
The food was steaming, and filled the room with its smell.
The gentlemen bent over the dishes set in front of them as if they wanted to test the food before eating it, and the gentleman in the middle, who seemed to count as an authority for the other two, did indeed cut off a piece of meat while it was still in its dish, clearly wishing to establish whether it was sufficiently cooked or whether it should be sent back to the kitchen.
It was to his satisfaction, and Gregor’s mother and sister, who had been looking on anxiously, began to breathe again and smiled.
The family themselves ate in the kitchen.
Nonetheless, Gregor’s father came into the living room before he went into the kitchen, bowed once with his cap in his hand and did his round of the table.
The gentlemen stood as one, and mumbled something into their beards.
Then, once they were alone, they ate in near perfect silence.
It seemed remarkable to Gregor that above all the various noises of eating their chewing teeth could still be heard, as if they had wanted to show Gregor that you need teeth in order to eat and it was not possible to perform anything with jaws that are toothless however nice they might be.
“I’d like to eat something”, said Gregor anxiously, “but not anything like they’re eating.
They do feed themselves.
And here I am, dying!” Throughout all this time, Gregor could not remember having heard the violin being played, but this evening it began to be heard from the kitchen.
The three gentlemen had already finished their meal, the one in the middle had produced a newspaper, given a page to each of the others, and now they leant back in their chairs reading them and smoking.
When the violin began playing they became attentive, stood up and went on tip-toe over to the door of the hallway where they stood pressed against each other.
Someone must have heard them in the kitchen, as Gregor’s father called out: “Is the playing perhaps unpleasant for the gentlemen?
We can stop it straight away.” “On the contrary”, said the middle gentleman, “would the young lady not like to come in and play for us here in the room, where it is, after all, much more cosy and comfortable?” “Oh yes, we’d love to”, called back Gregor’s father as if he had been the violin player himself.
The gentlemen stepped back into the room and waited.
Gregor’s father soon appeared with the music stand, his mother with the music and his sister with the violin.
She calmly prepared everything for her to begin playing; his parents, who had never rented a room out before and therefore showed an exaggerated courtesy towards the three gentlemen, did not even dare to sit on their own chairs; his father leant against the door with his right hand pushed in between two buttons on his uniform coat; his mother, though, was offered a seat by one of the gentlemen and sat—leaving the chair where the gentleman happened to have placed it—out of the way in a corner.
His sister began to play; father and mother paid close attention, one on each side, to the movements of her hands.
Drawn in by the playing, Gregor had dared to come forward a little and already had his head in the living room.
Before, he had taken great pride in how considerate he was but now it hardly occurred to him that he had become so thoughtless about the others.
What’s more, there was now all the more reason to keep himself hidden as he was covered in the dust that lay everywhere in his room and flew up at the slightest movement; he carried threads, hairs, and remains of food about on his back and sides; he was much too indifferent to everything now to lay on his back and wipe himself on the carpet like he had used to do several times a day.
And despite this condition, he was not too shy to move forward a little onto the immaculate floor of the living room.
No-one noticed him, though.
The family was totally preoccupied with the violin playing; at first, the three gentlemen had put their hands in their pockets and come up far too close behind the music stand to look at all the notes being played, and they must have disturbed Gregor’s sister, but soon, in contrast with the family, they withdrew back to the window with their heads sunk and talking to each other at half volume, and they stayed by the window while Gregor’s father observed them anxiously.
It really now seemed very obvious that they had expected to hear some beautiful or entertaining violin playing but had been disappointed, that they had had enough of the whole performance and it was only now out of politeness that they allowed their peace to be disturbed.
It was especially unnerving, the way they all blew the smoke from their cigarettes upwards from their mouth and noses.
Yet Gregor’s sister was playing so beautifully.
Her face was leant to one side, following the lines of music with a careful and melancholy expression.
Gregor crawled a little further forward, keeping his head close to the ground so that he could meet her eyes if the chance came.
Was he an animal if music could captivate him so?
It seemed to him that he was being shown the way to the unknown nourishment he had been yearning for.
He was determined to make his way forward to his sister and tug at her skirt to show her she might come into his room with her violin, as no-one appreciated her playing here as much as he would.
He never wanted to let her out of his room, not while he lived, anyway; his shocking appearance should, for once, be of some use to him; he wanted to be at every door of his room at once to hiss and spit at the attackers; his sister should not be forced to stay with him, though, but stay of her own free will; she would sit beside him on the couch with her ear bent down to him while he told her how he had always intended to send her to the conservatory, how he would have told everyone about it last Christmas—had Christmas really come and gone already?—if this misfortune hadn’t got in the way, and refuse to let anyone dissuade him from it.
On hearing all this, his sister would break out in tears of emotion, and Gregor would climb up to her shoulder and kiss her neck, which, since she had been going out to work, she had kept free without any necklace or collar.
“Mr.
Samsa!”, shouted the middle gentleman to Gregor’s father, pointing, without wasting any more words, with his forefinger at Gregor as he slowly moved forward.
The violin went silent, the middle of the three gentlemen first smiled at his two friends, shaking his head, and then looked back at Gregor.
His father seemed to think it more important to calm the three gentlemen before driving Gregor out, even though they were not at all upset and seemed to think Gregor was more entertaining than the violin playing had been.
He rushed up to them with his arms spread out and attempted to drive them back into their room at the same time as trying to block their view of Gregor with his body.
Now they did become a little annoyed, and it was not clear whether it was his father’s behaviour that annoyed them or the dawning realisation that they had had a neighbour like Gregor in the next room without knowing it.
They asked Gregor’s father for explanations, raised their arms like he had, tugged excitedly at their beards and moved back towards their room only very slowly.
Meanwhile Gregor’s sister had overcome the despair she had fallen into when her playing was suddenly interrupted.
She had let her hands drop and let violin and bow hang limply for a while but continued to look at the music as if still playing, but then she suddenly pulled herself together, lay the instrument on her mother’s lap who still sat laboriously struggling for breath where she was, and ran into the next room which, under pressure from her father, the three gentlemen were more quickly moving toward.
Under his sister’s experienced hand, the pillows and covers on the beds flew up and were put into order and she had already finished making the beds and slipped out again before the three gentlemen had reached the room.
Gregor’s father seemed so obsessed with what he was doing that he forgot all the respect he owed to his tenants.
He urged them and pressed them until, when he was already at the door of the room, the middle of the three gentlemen shouted like thunder and stamped his foot and thereby brought Gregor’s father to a halt.
“I declare here and now”, he said, raising his hand and glancing at Gregor’s mother and sister to gain their attention too, “that with regard to the repugnant conditions that prevail in this flat and with this family”—here he looked briefly but decisively at the floor—“I give immediate notice on my room.
For the days that I have been living here I will, of course, pay nothing at all, on the contrary I will consider whether to proceed with some kind of action for damages from you, and believe me it would be very easy to set out the grounds for such an action.” He was silent and looked straight ahead as if waiting for something.
And indeed, his two friends joined in with the words: “And we also give immediate notice.” With that, he took hold of the door handle and slammed the door.
Gregor’s father staggered back to his seat, feeling his way with his hands, and fell into it; it looked as if he was stretching himself out for his usual evening nap but from the uncontrolled way his head kept nodding it could be seen that he was not sleeping at all.
Throughout all this, Gregor had lain still where the three gentlemen had first seen him.
His disappointment at the failure of his plan, and perhaps also because he was weak from hunger, made it impossible for him to move.
He was sure that everyone would turn on him any moment, and he waited.
He was not even startled out of this state when the violin on his mother’s lap fell from her trembling fingers and landed loudly on the floor.
“Father, Mother”, said his sister, hitting the table with her hand as introduction, “we can’t carry on like this.
Maybe you can’t see it, but I can.
I don’t want to call this monster my brother, all I can say is: we have to try and get rid of it.
We’ve done all that’s humanly possible to look after it and be patient, I don’t think anyone could accuse us of doing anything wrong.” “She’s absolutely right”, said Gregor’s father to himself.
His mother, who still had not had time to catch her breath, began to cough dully, her hand held out in front of her and a deranged expression in her eyes.
Gregor’s sister rushed to his mother and put her hand on her forehead.
Her words seemed to give Gregor’s father some more definite ideas.
He sat upright, played with his uniform cap between the plates left by the three gentlemen after their meal, and occasionally looked down at Gregor as he lay there immobile.
“We have to try and get rid of it”, said Gregor’s sister, now speaking only to her father, as her mother was too occupied with coughing to listen, “it’ll be the death of both of you, I can see it coming.
We can’t all work as hard as we have to and then come home to be tortured like this, we can’t endure it.
I can’t endure it any more.” And she broke out so heavily in tears that they flowed down the face of her mother, and she wiped them away with mechanical hand movements.
“My child”, said her father with sympathy and obvious understanding, “what are we to do?” His sister just shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the helplessness and tears that had taken hold of her, displacing her earlier certainty.
“If he could just understand us”, said his father almost as a question; his sister shook her hand vigorously through her tears as a sign that of that there was no question.
“If he could just understand us”, repeated Gregor’s father, closing his eyes in acceptance of his sister’s certainty that that was quite impossible, “then perhaps we could come to some kind of arrangement with him.
But as it is ...” “It’s got to go”, shouted his sister, “that’s the only way, Father.
You’ve got to get rid of the idea that that’s Gregor.
We’ve only harmed ourselves by believing it for so long.
How can that be Gregor?
If it were Gregor he would have seen long ago that it’s not possible for human beings to live with an animal like that and he would have gone of his own free will.
We wouldn’t have a brother any more, then, but we could carry on with our lives and remember him with respect.
As it is this animal is persecuting us, it’s driven out our tenants, it obviously wants to take over the whole flat and force us to sleep on the streets.
Father, look, just look”, she suddenly screamed, “he’s starting again!” In her alarm, which was totally beyond Gregor’s comprehension, his sister even abandoned his mother as she pushed herself vigorously out of her chair as if more willing to sacrifice her own mother than stay anywhere near Gregor.
She rushed over to behind her father, who had become excited merely because she was and stood up half raising his hands in front of Gregor’s sister as if to protect her.
But Gregor had had no intention of frightening anyone, least of all his sister.
All he had done was begin to turn round so that he could go back into his room, although that was in itself quite startling as his pain-wracked condition meant that turning round required a great deal of effort and he was using his head to help himself do it, repeatedly raising it and striking it against the floor.
He stopped and looked round.
They seemed to have realised his good intention and had only been alarmed briefly.
Now they all looked at him in unhappy silence.
His mother lay in her chair with her legs stretched out and pressed against each other, her eyes nearly closed with exhaustion; his sister sat next to his father with her arms around his neck.
“Maybe now they’ll let me turn round”, thought Gregor and went back to work.
He could not help panting loudly with the effort and had sometimes to stop and take a rest.
No-one was making him rush any more, everything was left up to him.
As soon as he had finally finished turning round he began to move straight ahead.
He was amazed at the great distance that separated him from his room, and could not understand how he had covered that distance in his weak state a little while before and almost without noticing it.
He concentrated on crawling as fast as he could and hardly noticed that there was not a word, not any cry, from his family to distract him.
He did not turn his head until he had reached the doorway.
He did not turn it all the way round as he felt his neck becoming stiff, but it was nonetheless enough to see that nothing behind him had changed, only his sister had stood up.
With his last glance he saw that his mother had now fallen completely asleep.
He was hardly inside his room before the door was hurriedly shut, bolted and locked.
The sudden noise behind Gregor so startled him that his little legs collapsed under him.
It was his sister who had been in so much of a rush.
She had been standing there waiting and sprung forward lightly, Gregor had not heard her coming at all, and as she turned the key in the lock she said loudly to her parents “At last!”.
“What now, then?”, Gregor asked himself as he looked round in the darkness.
He soon made the discovery that he could no longer move at all.
This was no surprise to him, it seemed rather that being able to actually move around on those spindly little legs until then was unnatural.
He also felt relatively comfortable.
It is true that his entire body was aching, but the pain seemed to be slowly getting weaker and weaker and would finally disappear altogether.
He could already hardly feel the decayed apple in his back or the inflamed area around it, which was entirely covered in white dust.
He thought back of his family with emotion and love.
If it was possible, he felt that he must go away even more strongly than his sister.
He remained in this state of empty and peaceful rumination until he heard the clock tower strike three in the morning.
He watched as it slowly began to get light everywhere outside the window too.
Then, without his willing it, his head sank down completely, and his last breath flowed weakly from his nostrils.
When the cleaner came in early in the morning—they’d often asked her not to keep slamming the doors but with her strength and in her hurry she still did, so that everyone in the flat knew when she’d arrived and from then on it was impossible to sleep in peace—she made her usual brief look in on Gregor and at first found nothing special.
She thought he was laying there so still on purpose, playing the martyr; she attributed all possible understanding to him.
She happened to be holding the long broom in her hand, so she tried to tickle Gregor with it from the doorway.
When she had no success with that she tried to make a nuisance of herself and poked at him a little, and only when she found she could shove him across the floor with no resistance at all did she start to pay attention.
She soon realised what had really happened, opened her eyes wide, whistled to herself, but did not waste time to yank open the bedroom doors and shout loudly into the darkness of the bedrooms: “Come and ’ave a look at this, it’s dead, just lying there, stone dead!” Mr. and Mrs. Samsa sat upright there in their marriage bed and had to make an effort to get over the shock caused by the cleaner before they could grasp what she was saying.
But then, each from his own side, they hurried out of bed.
Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his shoulders, Mrs. Samsa just came out in her nightdress; and that is how they went into Gregor’s room.
On the way they opened the door to the living room where Grete had been sleeping since the three gentlemen had moved in; she was fully dressed as if she had never been asleep, and the paleness of her face seemed to confirm this.
“Dead?”, asked Mrs. Samsa, looking at the charwoman enquiringly, even though she could have checked for herself and could have known it even without checking.
“That’s what I said”, replied the cleaner, and to prove it she gave Gregor’s body another shove with the broom, sending it sideways across the floor.
Mrs. Samsa made a movement as if she wanted to hold back the broom, but did not complete it.
“Now then”, said Mr. Samsa, “let’s give thanks to God for that”.
He crossed himself, and the three women followed his example.
Grete, who had not taken her eyes from the corpse, said: “Just look how thin he was.
He didn’t eat anything for so long.
The food came out again just the same as when it went in”.
Gregor’s body was indeed completely dried up and flat, they had not seen it until then, but now he was not lifted up on his little legs, nor did he do anything to make them look away.
“Grete, come with us in here for a little while”, said Mrs. Samsa with a pained smile, and Grete followed her parents into the bedroom but not without looking back at the body.
The cleaner shut the door and opened the window wide.
Although it was still early in the morning the fresh air had something of warmth mixed in with it.
It was already the end of March, after all.
The three gentlemen stepped out of their room and looked round in amazement for their breakfasts; they had been forgotten about.
“Where is our breakfast?”, the middle gentleman asked the cleaner irritably.
She just put her finger on her lips and made a quick and silent sign to the men that they might like to come into Gregor’s room.
They did so, and stood around Gregor’s corpse with their hands in the pockets of their well-worn coats.
It was now quite light in the room.
Then the door of the bedroom opened and Mr. Samsa appeared in his uniform with his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other.
All of them had been crying a little; Grete now and then pressed her face against her father’s arm.
“Leave my home.
Now!”, said Mr. Samsa, indicating the door and without letting the women from him.
“What do you mean?”, asked the middle of the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smiled sweetly.
The other two held their hands behind their backs and continually rubbed them together in gleeful anticipation of a loud quarrel which could only end in their favour.
“I mean just what I said”, answered Mr. Samsa, and, with his two companions, went in a straight line towards the man.
At first, he stood there still, looking at the ground as if the contents of his head were rearranging themselves into new positions.
“Alright, we’ll go then”, he said, and looked up at Mr. Samsa as if he had been suddenly overcome with humility and wanted permission again from Mr. Samsa for his decision.
Mr. Samsa merely opened his eyes wide and briefly nodded to him several times.
At that, and without delay, the man actually did take long strides into the front hallway; his two friends had stopped rubbing their hands some time before and had been listening to what was being said.
Now they jumped off after their friend as if taken with a sudden fear that Mr. Samsa might go into the hallway in front of them and break the connection with their leader.
Once there, all three took their hats from the stand, took their sticks from the holder, bowed without a word and left the premises.
Mr. Samsa and the two women followed them out onto the landing; but they had had no reason to mistrust the men’s intentions and as they leaned over the landing they saw how the three gentlemen made slow but steady progress down the many steps.
As they turned the corner on each floor they disappeared and would reappear a few moments later; the further down they went, the more that the Samsa family lost interest in them; when a butcher’s boy, proud of posture with his tray on his head, passed them on his way up and came nearer than they were, Mr. Samsa and the women came away from the landing and went, as if relieved, back into the flat.
They decided the best way to make use of that day was for relaxation and to go for a walk; not only had they earned a break from work but they were in serious need of it.
So they sat at the table and wrote three letters of excusal, Mr. Samsa to his employers, Mrs. Samsa to her contractor and Grete to her principal.
The cleaner came in while they were writing to tell them she was going, she’d finished her work for that morning.
The three of them at first just nodded without looking up from what they were writing, and it was only when the cleaner still did not seem to want to leave that they looked up in irritation.
“Well?”, asked Mr. Samsa.
The charwoman stood in the doorway with a smile on her face as if she had some tremendous good news to report, but would only do it if she was clearly asked to.
The almost vertical little ostrich feather on her hat, which had been a source of irritation to Mr. Samsa all the time she had been working for them, swayed gently in all directions.
“What is it you want then?”, asked Mrs. Samsa, whom the cleaner had the most respect for.
“Yes”, she answered, and broke into a friendly laugh that made her unable to speak straight away, “well then, that thing in there, you needn’t worry about how you’re going to get rid of it.
That’s all been sorted out.” Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent down over their letters as if intent on continuing with what they were writing; Mr. Samsa saw that the cleaner wanted to start describing everything in detail but, with outstretched hand, he made it quite clear that she was not to.
So, as she was prevented from telling them all about it, she suddenly remembered what a hurry she was in and, clearly peeved, called out “Cheerio then, everyone”, turned round sharply and left, slamming the door terribly as she went.
“Tonight she gets sacked”, said Mr. Samsa, but he received no reply from either his wife or his daughter as the charwoman seemed to have destroyed the peace they had only just gained.
They got up and went over to the window where they remained with their arms around each other.
Mr. Samsa twisted round in his chair to look at them and sat there watching for a while.
Then he called out: “Come here, then.
Let’s forget about all that old stuff, shall we.
Come and give me a bit of attention”.
The two women immediately did as he said, hurrying over to him where they kissed him and hugged him and then they quickly finished their letters.
After that, the three of them left the flat together, which was something they had not done for months, and took the tram out to the open country outside the town.
They had the tram, filled with warm sunshine, all to themselves.
Leant back comfortably on their seats, they discussed their prospects and found that on closer examination they were not at all bad—until then they had never asked each other about their work but all three had jobs which were very good and held particularly good promise for the future.
The greatest improvement for the time being, of course, would be achieved quite easily by moving house; what they needed now was a flat that was smaller and cheaper than the current one which had been chosen by Gregor, one that was in a better location and, most of all, more practical.
All the time, Grete was becoming livelier.
With all the worry they had been having of late her cheeks had become pale, but, while they were talking, Mr. and Mrs. Samsa were struck, almost simultaneously, with the thought of how their daughter was blossoming into a well built and beautiful young lady.
They became quieter.
Just from each other’s glance and almost without knowing it they agreed that it would soon be time to find a good man for her.
And, as if in confirmation of their new dreams and good intentions, as soon as they reached their destination Grete was the first to get up and stretch out her young body.
