Tuberculosis, is a serious illness that mainly affects the lungs.
The germs that cause tuberculosis are a type of bacteria.
Tuberculosis can spread when a person with the illness coughs, sneezes or sings.
This can put tiny droplets with the germs into the air.
Another person can then breathe in the droplets, and the germs enter the lungs.
Tuberculosis spreads easily where people gather in crowds or where people live in crowded conditions.
People with HIV/AIDS and other people with weakened immune systems have a higher risk of catching tuberculosis than people with typical immune systems.
Medicines called antibiotics can treat tuberculosis.
But some forms of the bacteria no longer respond well to treatments.
When tuberculosis germs survive and multiply in the lungs, it is called a tuberculosis infection.
A tuberculosis infection may be in one of three stages.
Symptoms are different in each stage.
Primary tuberculosis infection.
The first stage is called the primary infection.
Immune system cells find and capture the germs.
The immune system may completely destroy the germs.
But some captured germs may still survive and multiply.
Most people don't have symptoms during a primary infection.
Some people may get flu-like symptoms.
Latent tuberculosis infection.
Primary infection is usually followed by the stage called latent tuberculosis infection.
Immune system cells build a wall around lung tissue with tuberculosis germs.
The germs can't do any more harm if the immune system keeps them under control.
But the germs survive.
There are no symptoms during latent tuberculosis infection.
Active tuberculosis disease.
Active tuberculosis disease happens when the immune system can't control an infection.
Germs cause disease throughout the lungs or other parts of the body.
Active tuberculosis disease may happen right after primary infection.
But it usually happens after months or years of latent tuberculosis infection.
Symptoms of active tuberculosis disease in the lungs usually begin gradually and worsen over a few weeks.
Active tuberculosis disease outside the lungs.
tuberculosis infection can spread from the lungs to other parts of the body.
This is called extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
Symptoms vary depending on what part of the body is infected.
Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
People with active tuberculosis disease in the lungs or voice box can spread the disease.
They release tiny droplets that carry the bacteria through the air.
This can happen when they're speaking, singing, laughing, coughing or sneezing.
A person can get an infection after inhaling the droplets.
The disease is more likely to spread when people spend a lot of time together in an indoor space.
So the disease spreads easily in places where people live or work together for long periods.
Also, the disease spreads more easily in crowded gatherings.
A person with a latent tuberculosis infection cannot pass the disease to other people.
A person taking medicine to treat active tuberculosis disease usually can't pass the disease after 2 to 3 weeks of treatment.
Some forms of the tuberculosis bacteria have become drug resistant.
This means that medicines that once cured the disease no longer work.
This happens, in part, because of naturally occurring genetic changes in bacteria.
A random genetic change in a bacterium might give it some quality that makes it more likely to survive the attack of an antibiotic.
If it does survive, then it can multiply.
When antibiotic medicines aren't used correctly — or medicines fail to clear out all the bacteria for another reason — the conditions are ideal for more-resistant versions of the bacteria to take hold and multiply.
If these bacteria are passed on to other people, a new drug-resistant strain can grow over time.
Anyone can get tuberculosis, but certain factors increase the risk of getting an infection.
Other factors increase the risk of an infection becoming active tuberculosis disease.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends a tuberculosis test for people who have an increased risk of tuberculosis infection or active tuberculosis disease.
Talk to your healthcare professional if you have one or more of the following risk factors.
If you test positive for latent tuberculosis infection, you may need to take medicines to prevent active tuberculosis disease.
Preventing the spread of disease
If you have active tuberculosis disease, you'll need to take steps to prevent other people from getting an infection.
You will take medicines for four, six or nine months.
Take all of the medicines as directed during the entire time.
During the first 2 to 3 weeks, you will be able to pass tuberculosis bacteria to others.
